---
title: "Equations to Algorithms --- Stable Algebraic Fixed Points"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
mathjax: true
---

I tend to spend a lot of time on math Wikipedia. In the hierarchy of math writing, I would put Wikipedia just above graduate level texts in mathematics and right below math papers in terms of readability. However, if you look around enough, there are some real gems.

One such gem that I found the other day is a formula for computing the polar decomposition of a matrix. The polar decomposition of a matrix is a broad generalization of the polar decomposition of a complex number. With complex numbers, we have the decomposition $z = re^{i\theta}$ where $r$ is a nonnegative real number and $e^{i\theta}$ is some point on the unit circle. We aim to do a similar thing to a square matrix $A$.

With matrices, there is a natural notion of nonnegativity: positive semidefinite matrices. These are symmetric matrices whose eigenvalues are all nonnegative. There is also a generalization of being "on the unit circle" for matrices, which is the notion of being an orthogonal matrix. An orthogonal matrix is any square matrix whose columns are orthonormal. So, the polar decomposition of a matrix should factor a matrix $A$ into a product of a positive semidefinite matrix and an orthogonal one, and this is exactly what it does!

The polar decomposition of a matrix $A$ is given by two matrices $U$ and $R$ such that $A = UR$, $U$ is orthogonal, and $R$ is positive semidefinite. One method of computing such a decomposition would be to find some way of computing $U$ and then multiplying $A$ by $U^T$ to yield $U^T A = R$. An algorithm for computing $U$ is given by the following iteration. Start with $U_0 = A$ and let
$$
U_{i+1} = \frac{1}{2}(U + U^{-T}).
$$